talking to E.L.
Doctorow.
I think, to start, and that'll pick up, that really I wouldn't even need to do this interview about this book, because I think what you tell us is in two essays in this book, 19th Century and False Documents, and I suspect that the first one, which was written in 92, and the second one in 91,
This book was percolating.
Let's start with that.
Well, you mean the essay book.
This essay book.
But it tells me about this book, I think.
I see.
I'll tell you the background of this.
I've been writing pieces, usually reluctantly, for many years.
I didn't realize there was enough for a book there.
But I didn't just want to write, put together a collection.
I was very selective in what I chose, and I tried to have the book make sense as a book.
The original title was going to be Poets and Presidents, which describes the orc that it covers.
But I was persuaded to put this title on.
It's just been published in England, and it's titled Poets and Press.
So why did you change, pardon me for interrupting?
My publishers and everyone around who's read the book thinking about it saw this title as a way to attract readers who
might not otherwise pick up a book of essays.
And I went along with that judgment.
And I do use the phrase, Poets in Presence, in the introductions.
That was my accommodation to the publisher.
The two pieces you mentioned, False Documents, was written in 1977, I think.
It's got a 91-day on it.
Oh, possibly.
Go ahead.
The other piece, the 19th New York.
The 19th New York.
Right.
First published in 1977.
But see, it says... I'm sorry, you just... Oh, I looked at the wrong one.
I looked at the wrong one.
Yeah.
Wait a second.
They made a mistake.
I think they did.
Yeah.
Because here... Oh, that's James Wright.
1991.
I'm sorry, sir.
You can talk.
I'm just looking at the standards.
It's 77.
I looked at the wrong one.
Okay, great.
Now that makes more sense.
A piece I originally wrote because I was so astonished at some of the reaction to ragtime, that
As if no one had ever used historical materials in a novel before.
I mean, I grew up reading Dumas and Victor Hugo in Tolstoy.
Dumas has Cardinal Richelieu as a character.
Victor Hugo has the Napoleonic campaign in Russia, and he has generals.
So that was the impetus for that book and the thesis of the false document.
Now, the 19th New York, if you took
If you wanted to bother to take the trouble, you'll see that I actually lifted whole paragraphs from the novel.
And that's really how this question started.
That is the print and essay for this novel.
During the course of writing the novel, an editor at Architectural Digest called me, and he'd been trying to get me to write an annual New York issue.
And I'd always turn him down.
And here I was writing this book about New York in which the city really almost figures as a character.
It's the first question I have here.
It's almost like a vanity fair.
It is a novel of the city.
Yeah, without question.
And when I realized that, and he said, how about it this year?
I said, okay.
And I...
pretending the voice was non-fictive, I lifted McElvain's observations and gave them to myself.
And, you know, then they put a picture of the, quote, holding a resume on the 46th century.
And there was the essay about New York in the 19th century.
What I was actually describing around that was how I'd begun to perceive the city as a result of writing this book.
I saw how much of the 19th century was still visible.
And I originally described in that essay this uncanny thing that happened when I was... I have an office window.
I don't know whether you were up there.
It looks south of Manhattan from about nine or ten stories up.
And where is the building?
It overlooks Houston Street, Soho.
And this enormous farm came in.
It first covered the World Trade Center, and then it covered all the 1960s steel and glass buildings, and then it covered the 1920s Woolworth Building, and soon it covered the entire 20th century.
It was gone, and there was the 19th century.
It was left.
It was a ground-level city.
It was never more than six or eight stories high.
The tallest things were church buildings.
towers, and I went outside, and I was walking down green streets through the iron fronts, and this was Melville City, this was Poe City, it was Whitman City.
So I gave that to the, without describing it personally, that perception to the Architectural Digest piece.
And then I put it in there as a kind of
It's probably the one piece that is least justifiable in terms of the arc of the book and relationship among the pieces.
But I like the idea of having something predictive of the novel, something that would, if anyone cared, they would see that I've been thinking about this in
The novel was almost predicted by the tone of the piece.
It certainly resonated with me, because this book of essays came out about seven or eight months ago.
And reading the book, I said, geez, there's a piece.
And I went back to this this morning just to refresh myself, because it really did.
Well, that was good.
That was observant of you.
But in fact, the novel was there before the piece was there.
I understand, but they certainly...
we're talking about a synergistic kind of a thing here whichever is feeding off the other I don't know but I think it certainly does express what you were doing at that time it certainly expresses my you know when you when you write it's a sort of continuous act of concentration that doesn't let up it almost becomes obsessive when you're doing a book
And it's such a single-minded thing.
And everyone else who was around me was living in the 20th century.
I was living in the 19th for the couple of years or two and a half years I was writing this book.
And all my perceptions were controlled by that.
So it was very easy to knock together that piece.
I'm not meaning to mention another critic, but Christopher Leeuwenhoff points out quite as duly that this novel springs from one of the stories in life.
Yes, that's true.
I mentioned that in an interview.
I forget where.
But in the Lives of the Poets,
There's a little two or three page dream story called The Water Works.
And that's the real beginning of the book, and the beginning of everything having to do with the 19th century.
I couldn't get that story out of my mind.
And I think about it, and then I went off and I wrote World's Fair.
And then I came sort of thinking about it again, and then I went off and I wrote Billy Bathgate.
Then I came back to it.
And it was time.
What I realized from those images, because there's nothing specific in that story.
There's no specific city.
There's no specific time.
I realized it had to be the 19th century because waterworks were the technological achievement of the 19th century image.
That's when they learned how to bring water to the city, put it under pressure.
That's when the fire departments were organized.
That's when they could fight fire with hoses rather than buckets.
And New York City, having been a very combustible town, used to burn all the time, just as McElvain describes.
It was incredible, awful.
Big fires, little fires.
Once they got the Croton Holding Reservoir in there, things were stabilized.
But the point is, so I had
I had my century, and then I remembered the Croton-Holding Reservoir in the middle of where the public library now stands.
So I had New York, and in the story there were these two guys.
One is the Observer, and the other is the strange bearded man, who wraps up the body of the child and runs off with it.
So that turned out to be Sartorius, and the Observer turned out to be McElvain.
The whole book is, in a sense, a deduction process of deducing the meaning and the implications and the evocative feelings that I had of writing that little dream.
See, it really does veer on the difference between the story and the novel.
I mean, maybe you wrote that little story and you weren't satisfied.
of completion, I guess.
No, absolutely not, or I wouldn't have been thinking about it so constantly.
Or I knew that it was terribly evocative.
And yet those stories and lives of the poets were, in a sense, related, certainly thematically, and they could have stood as a finished work, couldn't it?
But you still had to take it.
But you never know.
You know, all the books began with some, the smallest thing for me.
Even The Sound of Words, like Loon Lake, was what got that book going.
That's when I saw the sign on the road that said Loon Lake and up the Adirondack.
It's always an image or a picture.
anticipating my questions, because it starts with an image.
Yeah, rephrase.
For me, it does.
This book started with the images of that little boat sinking the reservoir, and then they find the boat's owner, as he says, also a miniature, drowned in the warworks.
That's how the book began.
Billy Bathgate began with the image of these guys in tuxedos.
What was that about?
to have the kid hop on the boat.
He was going to find out for me, you see.
So that's always the beginning.
And what was momentous is that sort of this, when you realize this little private excitement you have, this mysterious
I don't dare call it a state of arousal, but it's an excitement, and you realize there's a book there.
It'll keep going.
And so I start to write.
The next step was to have his voice, to have McElwain's voice.
None of these books can get written without somebody.
I always need an airing.
Well, I think it was just a stroke of genius to have this newspaper man, a naturally inquisitive and a trained investigator, what we call an investigator today, but in a position here, actually, to end the wherewithal to go on and to follow this.
It's interesting, because... And he's very observant, too.
We picked up his images of the city.
Yeah.
It's a story he didn't write.
And now he's thinking back in his old age, maybe 30, 35 years later.
I imagined him as talking to someone.
There's nothing the reader has to worry about, but I wanted to know in my mind who he was talking to.
And I decided he was talking to a stenographer.
I was about to say a tape recorder before it's invented.
I'll get to this.
Trust me, this is important.
He's talking to a stenographer who's obviously younger, necessarily younger, with these asides, and he's thinking about his words.
It's very important to him that he be understood.
So that was what I kept in my mind.
When Conrad has Marlow talking endlessly, he always sets it up at the beginning with another voice that says, we were all sitting on the afterdeck of the ship, and we lit our scars, and we were drinking brandy, and the sun was going down over the Thames, and Marlow said, blah, blah, blah, and Marlow is off on his tail.
Well, I just thought, I wonder if I should frame it up this way.
And then I decided, well, you don't have to do that anymore.
It's understood.
A contemporary reader understands.
I don't know.
This is the ancient mariner kind of guy talking.
That kind of situation.
But McElvain, the only clue he gives, he says, you people today, you have your
And you think we were colorful and quaint.
But we weren't.
We were deadly.
And we did not conduct ourselves as if we were preparatory to your time.
So that's the only hint I give that he's speaking probably around the turn of the century, when automobiles were motorcars and
And lights were electric lights.
I had to pause on that, as a matter of fact, and try and get the timing.
I remember that passage precisely.
I wonder, when the heck is he telling this thing now?
Well, we don't say telephones anymore.
We say phones.
That's right.
I remember that point where I actually had to figure it out, and I guess I came to that.
Well, that's the only sort of kind of
But it's necessary.
To the narrator.
And again, we're not going to get into the story too much, because it does speak for itself, and I don't want to give anything to it.
I love it.
The jacket art, normally we don't talk about jacket art.
Now is this your idea, or did the artists come up with this?
I thought maybe there should be a logo based on the
the omnibus with the old man in it.
But on the surface, if you know nothing about the novel, it's a charming picture of old New York.
Yeah.
Without knowing.
Well, I probably would have liked a dark or gloomier jacket.
But I thought this was striking.
Yeah.
And you can see it from a distance.
It's very important.
I noticed they did, and this hasn't happened to me before, they sent a review copy of the Large Type Edition.
Have you seen that yet?
Yeah, I've seen it.
That's pretty interesting that they did this simultaneous with that.
Yeah, these are all new things that happened.
They also simultaneously released an audio tape of an abridged version of the book read by Sam Waterston.
So they have the tape and the large print.
You mentioned earlier that you consider the city something of a character.
Is the city also a metaphor for you, the 19th century New York City, a metaphor for you?
We do have this closing image of the ghost city, and yet it's going to be the same.
I mean, it's even true of historians.
You're always writing to your own needs and the needs of the present somehow.
Beyond that, I wouldn't go to say that there was any conscious intention that I wanted the readers to draw a moral or anything that specific.
This question was asked about Billy Bathgate, too.
Writing about banksters, anything, did you mean to say anything about that?
Well, all I could say honestly was that
At any given time, there's a book you can write.
See, it's not for me endless possibilities.
Every time I say, well, what shall I do?
I always land on the only book I can write at that time.
In the 1980s under Reagan, that was the only book I could write about a kid who's in love with criminals.
But I never modeled it as an allegory of the 1980s, similarly with this.
This story was stuck in my mind, and suddenly it became possible for me to think clearly about it and advance my thought about it.
Now, why?
I don't know.
But there must be some relationship between
what I feel about now, any now, and the book I find it possible to write.
But more than that, I don't want to say, because you don't think about these things.
You're in the book.
You're in the images.
You're in the sentences.
You're living there.
And nothing extraneous can get in, because what it does, first of all, it's so powerful.
it's so magnetic this kind of thing that there's no nothing else exists you there because it is a mystery do you have this thing pretty well figured out going along or does it unravel for you exactly what happened the book is describes a process of discovery
which is roughly akin to my discoveries as I kept going.
I never want to know in advance what's going to happen.
Somewhere along the line, I began to perceive an ending.
And I knew eventually that Sartorius was behind all of this.
But it wasn't just Sartorius.
I will not say that in my opinion.
But at one point, Harry Evans of Random House said, I love Sartorius's title, Dr. Sartorius.
And I thought about that for a couple of days.
I said, no, I can't do that because it's about more than that.
McElvain's discovering more than that.
But it does.
Any book is a deductive process.
At a certain point, you begin to understand what your ending has to be.
You understand what your premises are that you have to deliver on.
But it exactly duplicates the reader's mystification.
Is the process a joy for you, or is it a pain in the butt?
Is it hard?
It's hard.
They're all hard.
They're all very hard.
But you also described that moment where you're looking out the window, and the frog does this magical thing to you.
Well, those are the great moments, but when you realize you've got the book,
you realize this is a book and I can do it.
And then when it's finished, you're very happy for a while and you get very sad.
In the middle, you have moments of great elation and I'll describe one of them to you.
But it's also very hard work and there are days when you have doubts and you throw out stuff you thought was good.
You physically throw stuff out?
Oh, yeah.
Lottery vision.
I've always been... You've got to keep those variants.
Well, I don't know.
I mean, the stacks and stacks of rejects on all the books.
I mean, I don't know where my wife despairs of all this.
Because I never throw anything out.
Oh, great.
Every manuscript page has at least six or eight or ten pages I've thrown away.
How do you write?
Did you write in longhand?
No, I've been writing the last few books on a computer.
But I'm sure that you do revisions on hard copy, though.
Absolutely.
The only way to do it— You know, there have been studies—I'm pointing to MIT— there have been studies which indicate that
The reaction to a text on a screen is different from the text on a page.
Without question.
I didn't know that from any study, but I could sense it.
The first thing I did, I was not trusting these newfangled things.
At the end of a work session, I always print things out, and then being unable to stop, I start to read what's on the page and see immediately
what has to be done to do my work on the page.
And so I got into that habit.
And I don't trust words that aren't on a page.
I like to see black print on white paper.
It's the way I've always worked.
Actually, I think it's even different.
Something looks different, reads different in print than it does.
Without question.
I made a lot of small corrections on the galleys.
They were always in such a hurry to publish my books with such a short lead time that I've learned to deal with the production people.
They have what they call the first pass.
That's what they usually bind and send to reviewers.
I said, give me the first pass.
Do not bind it.
I will give them back to you very quickly.
I make my corrections, and what goes out is the corrected—is the second pass, is what gets bound, you see?
And then I have time to do the fine stuff later.
I have this, I think.
They did a set of the proofs for the reviewers with a little blue kind of a—and that's actually the version that I read the novel.
Yeah, that's the second pass.
That's okay.
But it's inconceivable to me that everyone else would see it in print at the same time I was with seeing all these things new, as you described.
The author must have that however brief a time to see what the book looks like in print and make his adjustments before anybody else sees it.
And you see, you're a veteran of the industry.
I mean, yeah.
So you know how to deal with this.
How many writers today are savvy enough that are afforded this kind of a privilege, I wonder?
Well, I don't know.
Maybe some are more organized and doomed.
But I've always felt that a book in print is different from a book in type, without question.
I know of my book.
I've had the luxury now, because it took us a couple months to sell it.
I didn't look at it for six months.
And I find now that I'm just able to change things or to let things go.
I mean, it's not like an amputation now.
I'm just kind of removed from it.
I really think that the separation over a period of time, do you find that from the text?
Never mind from the written text, not necessarily the way it appears in galleys, but do you find that you need a little separation from it?
If you can, I don't have that leisure usually.
It's a continuous process from the minute I hand in the book.
But I think working as an editor for nine or ten years gave me a certain discipline.
That's a good quote.
The ability to look at my own work as objectively as I used to look at other people's work counts for an awful lot, I think, for me.
It taught me to be absolutely objective, clear-headed.
I read 50 pages of the book I'm writing on, and there's a complete separation between the editor and the writer.
So you're your own reader of First Resort then?
Yeah, I always have that.
But I have a very good editor, Jason Epstein, whose intentions to my manuscript are really valued.
He's extremely astute, thoughtful.
Is there a colloquy on the book, or does he, I mean, is there a conversation about the book?
Oh, sure.
About the work in progress, should I say.
Yeah, he made some very good, insightful points that I incorporated into it.
You know, we've been associates since 1976.
That's longer than most marriages, I know.
Sure.
19 years.
Today happens to be my 19th wedding anniversary today, June 15th.
Congratulations.
Thanks for whatever you're talking about.
I hope you're going out to dinner or doing something special.
i got my daughter with me here i keep seeing she's walking around out there and uh no actually a little bottle of champagne or something yeah that's it but anyway it's funny you just mentioned 19 years as a marriage it has happened today you know uh i don't know how much we have i think we've got plenty of good stuff here and of course we have the book and i don't want to take up too much i just want to take a
I never use them yet.
You write them down.
Are you working on something new now, might we ask?
I'll hole up in Sag Harbor for the summer and see what happens after a few of these prime excitements up there in the brain and see what happens.
I would like to ask about your take on the city, I mean the factual stuff.
Did you have to do a lot of research on this?
I did research in the state of medicine in the 19th century.
I did tend to that.
Also, I got very interested in the newspaper business in the 19th century.
It was extremely exciting.
The whole modern newspaper was made possible by the
They were incredibly fast, and suddenly they could distribute papers on the streets for a few pennies for thousands and thousands of copies.
And there were a lot of papers in town.
They were all very competitive from the very beginning.
The first attempt to get scoops from overseas was to send newsboats out to meet the arriving ships while they were still out coming into the harbor.
So newsboats were funny, and then James Gordon Bennett of the Herald
He bought his own boat, you know, and it was fast.
That's famous, yeah.
So from the very beginning, what we think of as a sort of spirit of competitive journalism was rampant in the city.
But you asked before about high moments in the process of writing the book.
One of those came when I was looking on microfilm at front pages of various papers in that period.
And of course, they never had pictures.
Only rarely was there a drawing of steel-pointing grainings, and it was too slow and too expensive.
So it was all words, and there were no banner heads.
There was never a headline that went across two columns, let alone the whole page.
Oh, one column head.
It was all one column head and several subheads.
It was a major story.
When it got to the bottom of the column, it continued to the next column.
So I had this...
I saw these pages of these descending columns, and there's seven of them.
That was the style.
And McElvain was able to use that as his metaphor for uncovering apparently separate stories going along together down the page, but which were, in fact, the same story.
Isn't that great?
Yes.
When I came on that...
I was so happy.
It was such a happy day of work.
So I don't know if that's research, you know?
Is that research?
I don't know.
Perception, maybe.
Perception.
And I did look at a lot of photographs.
It was a very well-photographed picture, you know, with street scenes, architecture.
people at their pleasures, whether the opera and the restaurants and the bars and stuff like that.
But most important to me were the street scenes and noticing that the traffic was always very heavy, except with horses and horse cars and carriages.
The fact that you could tell from these black-and-white photos that the ordinary city bus, horse-drawn bus, was always painted white, and they always had little paintings on the doors of country scenes, all these municipal transport things.
And that's how I suppose I decided that Martin would see
It's quite a scene.
It's a very powerful, very visual scene.
In fact, it's a very visual book.
I mean, you really do, you take care to really appeal to all of the senses, that just visually, but we hear the thing, we smell the thing, and feel it.
Flaubert says that's what you have to do.
He's the great theorist of fiction, and he said, you invoke all the senses.
Just as a person, every moment of his waking life is sensible in every way to what surrounds him.
But the idea of looking at a photograph and wanting to render it
is very important in this process.
And I did study very readily available photographs in New York or down the ports and the harbor and pictures taken from the top of the Brooklyn Bridge to show you the skyline of the time.
They were very enterprising.
You do say in the essay, in the collection, I guess it disturbs you that each generation does attempt to tear down the elements of the previous one.
Is this a concern of yours?
I mean, that we are so hasty to, if not tear down, cover up?
Well, it's a
It's unsettling that things that might be genuinely beautiful would be destroyed because some guy's going to make a few bucks.
And there are agencies in New York, the Landmark Preservation Commission, and the Municipal Arts Society.
There's a lot of pressure to preserve stuff that should be preserved.
My feeling in this is that
My discovery in this book was how much still exists from the past, even though we think we've erased it entirely.
I noticed it driving in Manhattan.
You stopped at a light.
You'll see all of a sudden one little building is there.
It's true.
There are whole neighborhoods.
Some of those row houses in the West Village, federal houses which go way back.
Jefferson Market Courthouse, a couple of armories around town, the Cooper Union.
You can start numerating things, but more than that, it's the layout of the streets, the names of the streets, the peculiar grid work down the village.
It's all from very early days.
What I hadn't realized, which you point out, is how rich, how wealthy New York
became in the aftermath of the Civil War.
It actually started during the Civil War.
They just cleaned up.
It was just, you know, wars do that.
And that's when they start to move north.
And all the wealthy people to get away from the immigrants and the working class, they start to go north of 23rd Street was north.
That was too close, up to 34th.
Suddenly, they were building mansions north of the reservoir on 5th Avenue, 42nd Street.
By the time Tweed was around, he managed to get himself a spot in this newly fashionable neighborhood.
Edith Wharton talks about an aunt of hers who built this
It's amazing.
Well, my aunt, who died last year at 102, told me that as a child,
She lived on the Upper East Side with her parents.
Her mother used to give her ten cents to go out downstairs and up a block to the farmer where she would pick the vetch, the carrots, the lettuce, the tomatoes from this truck farm.
on 98th Street and Madison Avenue for her tenths, a penny for this, two cents for that.
She'd come home with an onload of fresh vegetables that were from this farmer.
This is just a vague question.
I wonder how much New York is, how important New York is here.
Well, it seems to be pretty important.
It's just the place I usually set books.
It's the, it's my Yachna-Patofa County.
Somehow this has not been a plan.
It's not been intention.
I didn't set out to do this.
But when, you know,
It has been a setting for many of the books.
And someone asked me about that.
But it's more than a setting, too, though.
Well, it's kind of a home for the imagination.
Every writer needs two homes.
It's certainly more than a setting here.
I'm sorry.
Well, if you're talking about me, every writer needs two homes, a place to live and a place for his imagination.
That's one of the quotes.
Isn't that true?
Like Jack London.
Jack London.
What I described, he was just floundering until he went up to the Yukon.
Suddenly there was his place.
He was able to write about these dogs that thought like men.
And for the rest of his life, that was his territory and the home for his imagination.
But he was a Californian, so he had two places, one for his body and one for his mind, one for his imagination.
My two places happened to coincide.
It was very convenient.
So I've always lived in and around New York.
And it seems to be not all books.
Loon Lake is upstate, and hard times out west, and so on and so forth.
But I would say most of the books use New York.
But as I say, I never thought about it until this was pointed out to me by the people around me.
I said, are you really?
So I started thinking about it.
if you wanted to you could put these novels together this way you would start with the waterworks and then you would read ragtime and then billy bathgate say and then the book of daniel and you would have a hundred years of which starts in worcester yeah as you this is totally i won't be in the piece but did you were you familiar with this worcester area
A close friend of mine, Harold Reese, perhaps you know him, he's a psychiatrist and lives in Worcester.
And at the time I was thinking about this book, with the two families used to get together, our children were very small, and they would come down because they had relatives down where we were, or we'd come up to visit them and stay for weekends.
And he was then an attending psychiatrist at Worcester State Hospital and lived on the grounds.
On the campus.
So, you know, it was a little unsettling, but he ensured us.
But you'd see these odd poor people standing at the bus stop.
And the bus would come, and they wouldn't get on.
I can't tell you how many hundreds of times I've driven to work and have that precise image that you have being like that.
Just even coming around that little snake, you want to have that bus stop, which is there.
Yeah.
It was a startling thing.
But you know, you just soak up stuff.
And I decided to put them up there.
And to use that.
I used another, for the Lewin's house, I used the home of a friend of mine, Arthur Burney's professor of law at Boston College, on Winthrop Road.
Everything is grist.
Yes.
I think we've got plenty of stuff.
I would ask you, if you don't mind, to explore this for me.